README.md, before:

This repository accompanies the Alpha Lab guide, [Use a GPS With Neon to Measure a Wearer's Location, Eye, and Head Movements](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/alpha-lab/gps/).

It contains the source code for an Android application that collects GPS data in a manner that complements Neon recordings.

It also contains Python code for a Visualization Tool that allows you to review combined eyetracking and GPS data. The Visualization Tool can accept data from any GPS device, so long as they have been put in a CSV file with the following format:

```
timestamp [ns],latitude,longitude
```

If you used your own GPS device, you will likely first need to post-hoc synchronize the data with your Neon recording.

## To make a GPS recording with the gps-alpha-lab app

- [Download](https://github.com/pupil-labs/gps-alpha-lab/releases) (or build) the gps-alpha-lab APK.
- Copy the APK to the Companion Device. A decent location is `Internal Storage/Documents`.
- Open the `Files` app on the Device. Then, find and install the APK.
  - You may see a pop-up and need to first give the `Files` app permission to install the app.
- Connect Neon and start up the Neon Companion app
- Do some figure-8 motions with the Neon _and_ the Companion Device, [as shown here](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/data-collection/calibrating-the-imu/), so that they both have a good lock on magnetic north.
- Begin a Neon recording.
- Start up the gps-alpha-lab app, accept all permissions (if you have not done so yet), and tap the white button to start a GPS recording.
- Walk around and explore!
- If you walk past any landmarks of interest, simply click the `Send GPS Event` button in the app.
  - You will need to connect the Companion Device to the hotspot of a second phone to enable this functionality.
  - If that hotspot is also connected to the Internet, then the gps-alpha-lab app will reverse geocode the Event on the fly, so that it shows up as an address name on Pupil Cloud. Otherwise, it will show up on Pupil Cloud as `gps_event`.
- When you are finished, first tap the red button in the gps-alpha-lab app, and then stop the Neon recording.
  - The app will show a message with the name of the saved `gps … .csv` file. It will be in the `Documents/GPS` folder found in the `Files` app of the phone.
- Extract the saved GPS data to your computer either via a file syncing service, email, or via [USB cable using similar steps as when exporting Neon recordings](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/data-collection/transfer-recordings-via-usb/).

## Visualization Tool

Now, you can load the Neon recording and GPS recorded data into the Visualization Tool, found in the `viz_tool` directory.

The Visualization Tool expects the `Timeseries CSV + Scene Video` download from Pupil Cloud.

Place Neon's scene video in a sub-directory of the `assets/` folder, named with the recording's Datetime UID (i.e., the name of the folder in `Timeseries Data` that contains your recording). For example, if your recording is in `Timeseries Data/2025-05-31_10-34-57-30558036`, then make an `assets/2025-05-31_10-34-57-30558036/` folder and put the Scene Video in there.

**Tip:** If you would like to see the gaze point in the video, then first run a [Video Renderer Visualization](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/pupil-cloud/visualizations/video-renderer/) on Pupil Cloud for the recording and place that video in the appropriate sub-directory of the `assets/` folder.

You start the tool as follows:

```
python gps_viz_tool.py neon_timeseries_folder_filepath gps_csv_filepath
```

If you use [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), you can instead do:

```
uv run gps_viz_tool.py neon_timeseries_folder_filepath gps_csv_filepath
```

You can also pass an optional third parameter, `reverse_geocode`, to enable reverse geocoding of all events. Note that they will then be displayed with their address names.

Once started, you will see a web address listed in the terminal, typically http://127.0.0.1:8050/. Open this address in your web browser to view your data.

Briefly, the Visualization Tool shows three main panels:

- **Left:** A map with the wearer’s trajectory overlaid in blue. A black marker denotes the wearer's position. The IMU heading is shown as a black line, and the direction of gaze is shown as a red line. Positions corresponding to Events are shown as red markers.
- **Middle:** A video playback of the Neon recording.
- **Right:** A list of Events from the recording.

Clicking in the respective panel will jump to the corresponding points in the recording.

At the bottom, there are two dropdown selectors for `Start event` and `End event`. These can be used to limit the GPS trajectory to a subsection, making it easier to focus; for example, when wearers make several laps around a track.

Commit message:

updated README for new tool changes, add requirements file

README.md, after:

This repository accompanies the Alpha Lab guide, [Where did I see that? Eye Tracking & GPS](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/alpha-lab/gps/).

It contains the source code for an Android application that collects GPS data in a manner that complements Neon recordings.

It also contains Python code for a Visualization Tool that allows you to review combined eyetracking and GPS data. The Visualization Tool can accept data from any GPS device, so long as they have been put in a CSV file with the following format:

```
timestamp [ns],latitude,longitude
```

If you used your own GPS device, you will likely first need to post-hoc synchronize the data with your Neon recording.

## To make a GPS recording with the gps-alpha-lab app

- [Download](https://github.com/pupil-labs/gps-alpha-lab/releases) (or build) the gps-alpha-lab APK.
- Copy the APK to the Companion Device. A decent location is `Internal Storage/Documents`.
- Open the `Files` app on the Device. Then, find and install the APK.
  - You may see a pop-up and need to first give the `Files` app permission to install the app.
- Connect Neon and start up the Neon Companion app
- Do some figure-8 motions with the Neon _and_ the Companion Device, [as shown here](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/data-collection/calibrating-the-imu/), so that they both have a good lock on magnetic north.
- Begin a Neon recording.
- Start up the gps-alpha-lab app, accept all permissions (if you have not done so yet), and tap the white button to start a GPS recording.
- Walk around and explore!
- If you walk past any landmarks of interest, simply tap the `Send GPS Event` button in the app.
  - You will need to connect the Companion Device to the hotspot of a second phone to enable this functionality.
  - If that hotspot is also connected to the Internet, then the gps-alpha-lab app will reverse geocode the Event on the fly, so that it shows up as an address name on Pupil Cloud. Otherwise, it will show up on Pupil Cloud as `gps_event`.
- When you are finished, first tap the red button in the gps-alpha-lab app, and then stop the Neon recording.
  - The app will show a message with the name of the saved `gps … .csv` file. It will be in the `Documents/GPS` folder found in the `Files` app of the phone.
- Extract the saved GPS data to your computer either via a file syncing service, email, or via [USB cable using similar steps as when exporting Neon recordings](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/data-collection/transfer-recordings-via-usb/).

## Visualization Tool

Now, you can load the Neon recording and GPS recorded data into the Visualization Tool, found in the `viz_tool` directory.

The Visualization Tool expects the `Timeseries CSV + Scene Video` download from Pupil Cloud.

Place Neon's scene video in a sub-directory of the `assets/` folder, named with the recording's Datetime UID (i.e., the name of the folder in `Timeseries Data` that contains your recording). For example, if your recording is in `Timeseries Data/2025-05-31_10-34-57-30558036`, then make an `assets/2025-05-31_10-34-57-30558036/` folder and put the Scene Video in there.

**Tip:** If you would like to see the gaze point in the video, then first run a [Video Renderer Visualization](https://docs.pupil-labs.com/neon/pupil-cloud/visualizations/video-renderer/) on Pupil Cloud for the recording and place that video in the appropriate sub-directory of the `assets/` folder.

You start the tool as follows:

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
python gps_viz_tool.py neon_timeseries_folder_filepath gps_csv_filepath
```

The tool has been tested with Python 3.11.

If you use [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), you can instead do:

```
uv run gps_viz_tool.py neon_timeseries_folder_filepath gps_csv_filepath
```

You can also pass an optional third parameter, `reverse_geocode`, to enable reverse geocoding of all events. Note that they will then be displayed with their address names.

Once started, you will see a web address listed in the terminal, typically http://127.0.0.1:8050/. Open this address in your web browser to view your data.

Briefly, the Visualization Tool shows three main panels:

- **Left:** A map with the wearer’s trajectory overlaid in blue. A black marker denotes the wearer's position. Neon's Field of View (FoV) is shown as a blue arc, oriented by Neon's IMU heading, and the direction of gaze is shown as a red line. Positions corresponding to Events are shown as red markers.
- **Middle:** A video playback of the Neon recording.
- **Right:** A list of Events from the recording.

Clicking in the respective panel will jump to the corresponding points in the recording.

At the bottom, there are two dropdown selectors for `Start event` and `End event`. These can be used to limit the GPS trajectory to a subsection, making it easier to focus; for example, when wearers make several laps around a track.
